MorphoDiTa: Morphological Dictionary and Tagger
Version 1.9.3-devel

= Introduction =[introduction]

%!include: morphodita_about.t2t


= Online Web Application and Web Service =[online]

%!include: morphodita_online.t2t


= Release =[release]

== Download ==[download]

MorphoDiTa releases are available on [GitHub http://github.com/ufal/morphodita], both as
source code and as a pre-compiled binary package. The binary package contains Linux,
Windows and OS X binaries, Java bindings binary, C# bindings binary, and source
code of MorphoDiTa and all language bindings). While the binary
packages do not contain compiled Python or Perl bindings, packages for those
languages are available in standard package repositories,
i.e. on [PyPI https://pypi.python.org/pypi/ufal.morphodita/]
and [CPAN https://metacpan.org/pod/Ufal::MorphoDiTa].

- [Latest release http://github.com/ufal/morphodita/releases/latest]
- [All releases http://github.com/ufal/morphodita/releases], [Changelog https://github.com/ufal/morphodita/blob/master/CHANGES]


=== Language Models ===[language_models]

To use MorphoDiTa, a language model is needed. The language models are available
from [LINDAT/CLARIN http://www.lindat.cz] infrastructure and described further
in the
%web% [MorphoDiTa User's Manual morphodita/users-manual].
%manual% [MorphoDiTa User's Manual #users_manual].
Currently the following language models are available:

- Czech: [czech-morfflex-pdt-161115 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1836] (requires MorphoDiTa 1.9, [documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/users-manual#czech-morfflex-pdt]); older versions: [czech-morfflex-pdt-160310 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1674] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/users-manual#czech-morfflex-pdt_changes]), [czech-morfflex-pdt-131112 http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0023-68D8-1] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/users-manual#czech-morfflex-pdt_changes])
- English: [english-morphium-wsj-140407 http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0023-68D9-0] ([documentation http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/users-manual#english-morphium-wsj])


== License ==[license]

MorphoDiTa is an open-source project and is freely available for non-commercial
purposes. The library is distributed under
[Mozilla Public License 2.0 http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/] and the associated models and data
under [CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/], although
for some models the original data used to create the model may impose
additional licensing conditions.

If you use this tool for scientific work, please give credit to us by
referencing [MorphoDiTa website http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita] and
[Straková et al. 2014 http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5003.pdf].


= MorphoDiTa Installation =[instalation]

%web% [MorphoDiTa Installation on separate page. morphodita/install]
%manual% %!include: morphodita_install.t2t


= MorphoDiTa User's Manual =[users_manual]

%web% [MorphoDiTa User's Manual on separate page. morphodita/users-manual]
%manual% %!include: morphodita_user.t2t


= MorphoDiTa API Tutorial =[api_tutorial]

%web% [MorphoDiTa API Tutorial on separate page. morphodita/api-tutorial]
%manual% %!include: morphodita_api_tutorial.t2t


= MorphoDiTa API Reference =[api_reference]

%web% [MorphoDiTa API Reference on separate page. morphodita/api-reference]
%manual% %!include: morphodita_api_reference.t2t


= Contact =[contact]

Authors:
- [Milan Straka http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/milan-straka], straka@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
- [Jana Straková http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/jana-strakova], strakova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz


[MorphoDiTa website http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita].

[MorphoDiTa LINDAT/CLARIN entry http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0023-43CD-0].


= Acknowledgements =[morphodita_acknowledgements]

This work has been using language resources developed and/or stored and/or distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//).

%web% Acknowledgements for individual language models are listed in [MorphoDiTa User's Manual page morphodita/users-manual].
%manual% Acknowledgements for individual language models are listed in [MorphoDiTa User's Manual #users_manual].


== Publications ==[publications]

- (Straková et al. 2014) Straková Jana, Straka Milan and Hajič Jan. //[Open-Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatization, POS Tagging and Named Entity Recognition. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5003.pdf]// In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 13-18, Baltimore, Maryland, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics.

- (Spoustová et al. 2009) Drahomíra "johanka" Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Raab, Miroslav Spousta. 2009. //[Semi-Supervised Training for the Averaged Perceptron POS Tagger. http://aclweb.org/anthology//E/E09/E09-1087.pdf]// In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 763-771, Athens, Greece, March. Association for Computational Linguistics.


== Bibtex for Referencing ==[bibtex_for_referencing]

```
@InProceedings{strakova14,
  author    = {Strakov\'{a}, Jana  and  Straka, Milan  and  Haji\v{c}, Jan},
  title     = {Open-{S}ource {T}ools for {M}orphology, {L}emmatization, {POS} {T}agging and {N}amed {E}ntity {R}ecognition},
  booktitle = {Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations},
  month     = {June},
  year      = {2014},
  address   = {Baltimore, Maryland},
  publisher = {Association for Computational Linguistics},
  pages     = {13--18},
  url       = {http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5003.pdf}
}
```

== Persistent Identifier ==[persistent_identifier]

If you prefer to reference MorphoDiTa by a persistent identifier (PID),
you can use ``http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0023-43CD-0``.
