Czech MorphoDiTa Models
=======================

%!encoding: utf-8

== Czech MorphoDiTa Models ==

Czech models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/] licence.
The Czech morphology uses the
[MorfFlex CZ https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11858/00-097C-0000-0015-A780-9]
Czech morphological dictionary and the Czech tagger is trained on
[PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/]. Czech models work in MorphoDiTa
version 1.0 or later.

Czech models are versioned according to the version of the MorfFlex CZ
morphological dictionary used, the version format is ``YYMMDD``, where ``YY``,
``MM`` and ``DD`` are two-digit representation of year, month and day,
respectively. The latest version is 131112.

Compared to Featurama http://sourceforge.net/projects/featurama/
(state-of-the-art Czech tagger implementation), the models are 5 times faster
and 10 times smaller.

=== Czech Morphologic System ===[czech_morphologic_system]

In the Czech language, MorphoDiTa uses Czech morphologic system by
Jan Hajič ([Hajič 2004 http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ]).
In this system, tags are positional with 15 positions corresponding to part of
speech, detailed part of speech, gender, number, case, etc. (e.g. ``NNFS1-----A----``).
Different meanings of same lemmas are distinguished and additional comments
can be provided for every lemma meaning. The lemma itself without the comments
and meaning specification is called a //raw lemma//. The following examples
illustrate this:

- ``Japonsko_;G`` (raw lemma: ``Japonsko``)
- ``se_^(zvr._zájmeno/částice)`` (raw lemma: ``se``)
- ``tvořit_:T`` (raw lemma: ``tvořit``)


For a more detailed reference about the Czech morphology, please see
[Lemma and Tag Structure in PDT 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/m-layer/html/ch02.html].

=== Main Czech Model ===

The main Czech model contains the following files:

: ``czech-<version>.dict``
  Morphologic dictionary only based on the Jan Hajič's ([Hajič 2004 http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ])
  system created from
  [MorfFlex CZ https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11858/00-097C-0000-0015-A780-9] morphologic dictionary.

: ``czech-<version>.tagger-best_accuracy``
  Best and slowest tagger (Viterbi of order 3) trained on the training portion
  of [PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/]. Contains the
  ``czech-<version>.dict`` morphologic dictionary.

  The latest version ``czech-131112.tagger-best_accuracy`` reaches 95.67% tag
  accuracy, 97.78% lemma accuracy and 94.97% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/] etest data (whose morphologic tags
  were remapped using the ``czech-131112.dict`` dictionary). Model speed: ~10k words/s,
  model size: 17MB. For comparison, model trained by
  [Featurama http://sourceforge.net/projects/featurama/] (state-of-the-art
  Czech tagger implementation) reaches 95.66%, 97.70%, 94.90% of tag, lemma and
  overall accuracy, respectively, with speed ~2k words/s and size 210MB.

: ``czech-<version>.tagger-fast``
  Faster tagger with slightly worse results (Viterbi of order 2) trained on the
  training portion of [PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/]. Contains also
  the ``czech-<version>.dict`` morphologic dictionary.

  The latest version ``czech-131112.tagger-fast`` reaches 94.70% tag accuracy,
  97.64% lemma accuracy and 93.94% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5] etest data (whose morphologic tags
  were remapped using the ``czech-131112.dict`` dictionary). Model speed: ~60k words/s,
  model size: 11MB.


=== Part of Speech Only Variant ===

The tags used by the main Czech model are very fine-grained. In many
situations, only the part of speech tags would be sufficient. Therefore, we
provide a variant of the model, denoted as ``pos_only``, where only the first
two characters of the fifteen-letter tags are used, representing the part of
speech and detailed part of speech, respectively. There are 67 such two-letter tags.

: ``czech-<version>-pos_only.dict``
  Morphologic dictionary only based on the Jan Hajič's ([Hajič 2004 http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ])
  system created from
  [MorfFlex CZ https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11858/00-097C-0000-0015-A780-9] morphologic dictionary.
  Only first two tag characters are used.

: ``czech-<version>-pos_only.tagger``
  Very fast tagger trained on the training portion of
  [PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/] containing the
  ``czech-<version>-pos_only.dict`` morphologic dictionary.

  The latest version ``czech-131112-pos_only.tagger`` reaches 99.18% tag
  accuracy, 97.64% lemma accuracy and 97.59% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5] etest data (which morphologic tags
  were remapped using the ``czech-131112-pos_only.dict`` dictionary).
  Model speed: ~200k words/s, model size: 4MB.


=== Raw Lemmas Variant ===

The Czech morphologic system distinguish different meanings of same lemmas by
numbering the lemmas with multiple meanings and supplying additional comments
for every lemma meaning, as described and demonstrated in
[Czech Morphologic System #czech_morphologic_system]. Sometimes this may be
undesirable, for example when comparing to systems which do not use the
[MorfFlex CZ https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11858/00-097C-0000-0015-A780-9]
morphologic dictionary.

Therefore, all already mentioned Czech models have a variant which does not
disambiguate lemma meanings and provides no additional comments. (In terms of
MorphoDiTa API, the lemmas are //raw lemmas// with empty //lemma ids// and
//lemma comments//.) These model variants are denoted by ``raw_lemmas``.
