Slovak MorfFlex+PDT Models
==========================

== Slovak MorfFlex+PDT Models ==[slovak-morfflex-pdt]

Slovak models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/] licence.
The Slovak morphology uses the
[MorfFlex SK 170914 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-3277]
Slovak morphological dictionary and the Slovak tagger is trained on
automatically translated [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0].
Slovak models work in MorphoDiTa version 1.9 or later.

Apart from MorfFlex SK dictionary, a statistical guesser is implemented and can
be optionally used when performing morphological analysis.

Slovak models are versioned according to the version of the MorfFlex SK
morphological dictionary used, the version format is ``YYMMDD``, where ``YY``,
``MM`` and ``DD`` are two-digit representation of year, month and day,
respectively. The latest version is 170914.


=== Download ===[slovak-morfflex-pdt_download]

The latest version 170914 of the Slovak MorfFlex+PDT models can be downloaded
from [LINDAT/CLARIN repository http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-3278].


=== Acknowledgements ===[slovak-morfflex-pdt_acknowledgements]

This work has also been supported by the LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ Research
Infrastructure (https://lindat.cz), supported by the Ministry of Education,
Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic (Project No. //LM2018101//).
It has also been using language resources developed and stored and
distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the
Czech Republic (project //LM2015071//).

The Czech morphological system was devised by Jan Hajič.

The MorfFlex SK dictionary was created by Jan Hajič and Jan Hric.

The tagger algorithm and feature set research was supported by the projects
//MSM0021620838// and //LC536// of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic,
//GA405/09/0278// of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic and //1ET101120503// of
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. The research was performed by
Drahomíra "johanka" Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Raab and Miroslav Spousta.

The tagger is trained on morphological layer of Prague Dependency Treebank PDT
3.0, which was supported by the projects //LM2010013//, //LC536//,
//LN00A063// and //MSM0021620838// of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
of the Czech Republic, and developed by Martin Buben, Jan Hajič, Jiří Hana,
Hana Hanová, Barbora Hladká, Emil Jeřábek, Lenka Kebortová, Kristýna Kupková,
Pavel Květoň, Jiří Mírovský, Andrea Pfimpfrová, Jan Štěpánek and Daniel Zeman.


==== Publications ====[slovak-morfflex-pdt_publications]

- (Hajič 2004) Jan Hajič. //[Disambiguation of Rich Inflection: Computational Morphology of Czech. http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ]// Karolinum Press (2004).

- (Spoustová et al. 2009) Drahomíra "johanka" Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Raab, Miroslav Spousta. 2009. //[Semi-Supervised Training for the Averaged Perceptron POS Tagger. http://aclweb.org/anthology//E/E09/E09-1087.pdf]// In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 763-771, Athens, Greece, March. Association for Computational Linguistics.

- (Straková et al. 2014) Straková Jana, Straka Milan and Hajič Jan. //[Open-Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatization, POS Tagging and Named Entity Recognition. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5003.pdf]// In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 13-18, Baltimore, Maryland, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics.


=== Slovak Morphological System ===[slovak_morphological_system]

In the Slovak language, MorphoDiTa uses the
[same morphological system as Czech #czech_morphological_system].


=== Main Slovak Model ===[slovak-morfflex-pdt_model]

The main Slovak model contains the following files:

: ``slovak-morfflex-170914.dict``
  Morphological dictionary based on the Jan Hajič's ([Hajič 2004 http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ])
  system with PDT tag set created from
  [MorfFlex SK 170914 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-3277] morphological dictionary.

: ``slovak-morfflex-pdt-170914.tagger``
  Tagger trained on the training portion
  of automatically translated [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] using
  the ``neopren`` feature set. It contains the ``slovak-morfflex-170914.dict``
  morphological dictionary. and reaches 92.8% tag accuracy, 96.3% lemma
  accuracy and 92.0% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] etest data (whose morphological tags and
  lemmas were remapped using the ``slovak-morfflex-170914.dict`` dictionary).
  Model speed: ~5k words/s, model size: 17MB.


=== Part of Speech Only Variant ===[slovak-morfflex-pdt_pos_variant]

The PDT tag set used by the main Slovak model is very fine-grained. In many
situations, only the part of speech tags would be sufficient. Therefore, we
provide a variant of the model, denoted as ``pos_only``, where only the first
two characters of the fifteen-letter tags are used, representing the part of
speech and detailed part of speech, respectively. There are 67 such two-letter tags.

: ``slovak-morfflex-170914-pos_only.dict``
  A variant of `slovak-morfflex-170914.dict`, where only the first two tag
  characters are used.

: ``slovak-morfflex-pdt-170914-pos_only.tagger``
  Very fast variant of ``slovak-morfflex-170914.tagger`` predicting
  only two-character tags. It reaches 98.3% tag accuracy, 97.4% lemma
  accuracy and 96.8% overall accuracy on [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0]
  etest data (which morphological tags and lemmas were remapped using the
  ``slovak-morfflex-170914-pos_only.dict`` dictionary).
  Model speed: ~200k words/s, model size: 4MB.


=== No Diacritical Marks Variant ===[slovak-morfflex-pdt_no_dia_variant]

Sometimes the text to be analyzed does not contain diacritical marks.
We therefore provide variants of the morphological dictionary and tagger
for this purpose -- morphological analysis, morphological generation and
tagging employ forms without diacritical marks. Note that the lemmas do
have diacritical marks.

We provide the ``no_dia`` variants for all four models described above:

: ``slovak-morfflex-170914-no_dia.dict``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``slovak-morfflex-170914.dict``.

: ``slovak-morfflex-pdt-170914-no_dia.tagger``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``slovak-morfflex-170914.tagger``.
  It reaches 91.4% tag
  accuracy, 92.8% lemma accuracy and 89.0% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] etest data (which morphological tags and lemmas
  were remapped using the ``slovak-morfflex-170914-no_dia.dict`` dictionary)
  with diacritical marks removed.
  Model speed: ~5k words/s, model size: 18MB.

: ``slovak-morfflex-170914-no_dia-pos_only.dict``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``slovak-morfflex-170914-pos_only.dict``.

: ``slovak-morfflex-pdt-170914-no_dia-pos_only.tagger``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``slovak-morfflex-170914-pos_only.tagger``.
  It reaches 97.5% tag
  accuracy, 93.9% lemma accuracy and 93.2% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] etest data (which morphological tags and lemmas
  were remapped using the ``slovak-morfflex-170914-no_dia-pos_only.dict`` dictionary)
  with diacritical marks removed.
  Model speed: ~200k words/s, model size: 7MB.


