Czech MorphoDiTa Models
=======================

== Czech MorphoDiTa Models ==[czech-morfflex-pdt]

Czech models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/] licence.
The Czech morphology uses the
[MorfFlex CZ 161115 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1834]
Czech morphological dictionary and the Czech tagger is trained on
[PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0]. The morpholodical derivator
is uses the [DeriNet 1.2 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/derinet].
Czech models work in MorphoDiTa version 1.9 or later.

Apart from MorfFlex CZ dictionary, a prefix guesser and statistical guesser
are implemented and can be optionally used when performing morphological analysis.

Czech models are versioned according to the version of the MorfFlex CZ
morphological dictionary used, the version format is ``YYMMDD``, where ``YY``,
``MM`` and ``DD`` are two-digit representation of year, month and day,
respectively. The latest version is 161115.

Compared to Featurama http://sourceforge.net/projects/featurama/
(state-of-the-art Czech tagger implementation), the models are 5 times faster
and 10 times smaller.


=== Download ===[czech-morfflex-pdt_download]

The latest version 161115 of the Czech MorphoDiTa models can be downloaded
from [LINDAT/CLARIN repository http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1836].

==== Previous Versions ====[czech-morfflex-pdt_download_previous]

- Version 160310 of the Czech MorphoDiTa models can be downloaded
  from [LINDAT/CLARIN repository http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1674].
- Version 131112 of the Czech MorphoDiTa models can be downloaded
  from [LINDAT/CLARIN repository http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0023-68D8-1].
-


=== Acknowledgements ===[czech-morfflex-pdt_acknowledgements]

This work has been using language resources developed and/or stored and/or
distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the
Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//).

The Czech morphological system was devised by Jan Hajič.

The MorfFlex CZ dictionary was created by Jan Hajič and Jaroslava Hlaváčová.

The morphological guesser research was supported by the projects
//1ET101120503// and //1ET101120413// of Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic and //100008/2008// of Charles University Grant Agency. The research
was performed by Jan Hajič, Jaroslava Hlaváčová and David Kolovratník.

The tagger algorithm and feature set research was supported by the projects
//MSM0021620838// and //LC536// of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic,
//GA405/09/0278// of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic and //1ET101120503// of
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. The research was performed by
Drahomíra "johanka" Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Raab and Miroslav Spousta.

The tagger is trained on morphological layer of Prague Dependency Treebank PDT
3.0, which was supported by the projects //LM2010013//, //LC536//,
//LN00A063// and //MSM0021620838// of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
of the Czech Republic, and developed by Martin Buben, Jan Hajič, Jiří Hana,
Hana Hanová, Barbora Hladká, Emil Jeřábek, Lenka Kebortová, Kristýna Kupková,
Pavel Květoň, Jiří Mírovský, Andrea Pfimpfrová, Jan Štěpánek and Daniel Zeman.

The morphological derivator is based on DeriNet, which was supported by the
Grant No. 16-18177S of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic and uses
language resources developed, stored, and distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN
project of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic
(project LM2015071).


==== Publications ====[czech-morfflex-pdt_publications]

- (Hajič 2004) Jan Hajič. //[Disambiguation of Rich Inflection: Computational Morphology of Czech. http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ]// Karolinum Press (2004).

- Hlaváčová Jaroslava, Kolovratník David. //Morfologie češtiny znovu a lépe.// In Informačné Technológie - Aplikácie a Teória. Zborník príspevkov, ITAT 2008.  Seňa, Slovakia: PONT s.r.o., 2008, pp. 43-47.

- (Spoustová et al. 2009) Drahomíra "johanka" Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Raab, Miroslav Spousta. 2009. //[Semi-Supervised Training for the Averaged Perceptron POS Tagger. http://aclweb.org/anthology//E/E09/E09-1087.pdf]// In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 763-771, Athens, Greece, March. Association for Computational Linguistics.

- (Straková et al. 2014) Straková Jana, Straka Milan and Hajič Jan. //[Open-Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatization, POS Tagging and Named Entity Recognition. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5003.pdf]// In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 13-18, Baltimore, Maryland, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics.

- (Žabokrtský et al. 2016) Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Magda Ševčíková, Milan Straka, Jonáš Vidra and Adéla Limburská. //Merging Data Resources for Inflectional and Derivational Morphology in Czech.// In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Portorož, Slovenia, May 2016.


=== Czech Morphological System ===[czech_morphological_system]

In the Czech language, MorphoDiTa uses Czech morphological system by
Jan Hajič ([Hajič 2004 http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ]).
In this system, which we call //PDT tag set//, the tags are positional with 15
positions corresponding to part of speech, detailed part of speech, gender,
number, case, etc. (e.g. ``NNFS1-----A----``).  Different meanings of same
lemmas are distinguished and additional comments can be provided for every
lemma meaning. The lemma itself without the comments and meaning specification
is called a //raw lemma//. The following examples illustrate this:

- ``Japonsko_;G`` (raw lemma: ``Japonsko``)
- ``se_^(zvr._zájmeno/částice)`` (raw lemma: ``se``)
- ``tvořit_:T`` (raw lemma: ``tvořit``)


For a more detailed reference about the Czech morphology, please see
[Lemma and Tag Structure in PDT 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/m-layer/html/ch02.html].

=== Main Czech Model ===[czech-morfflex-pdt_model]

The main Czech model contains the following files:

: ``czech-morfflex-161115.dict``
  Morphological dictionary based on the Jan Hajič's ([Hajič 2004 http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ])
  system with PDT tag set created from
  [MorfFlex CZ 161115 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1834] morphological dictionary
  and [DeriNet 1.2 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/derinet].

: ``czech-morfflex-pdt-161115.tagger``
  Tagger trained on the training portion
  of [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] using the ``neopren`` feature
  set. It contains the ``czech-morfflex-161115.dict`` morphological dictionary.
  and reaches 95.55% tag
  accuracy, 97.86% lemma accuracy and 95.06% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] etest data (whose morphological tags and lemmas
  were remapped using the ``czech-morfflex-161115.dict`` dictionary). Model speed: ~15k words/s,
  model size: 18MB.


=== Part of Speech Only Variant ===[czech-morfflex-pdt_pos_variant]

The PDT tag set used by the main Czech model is very fine-grained. In many
situations, only the part of speech tags would be sufficient. Therefore, we
provide a variant of the model, denoted as ``pos_only``, where only the first
two characters of the fifteen-letter tags are used, representing the part of
speech and detailed part of speech, respectively. There are 67 such two-letter tags.

: ``czech-morfflex-161115-pos_only.dict``
  Morphological dictionary based on the Jan Hajič's ([Hajič 2004 http://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ])
  system created from
  [MorfFlex CZ 161115 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1834] morphological dictionary
  and [DeriNet 1.2 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/derinet].
  Only first two tag characters of PDT tag set are used.

: ``czech-morfflex-pdt-161115-pos_only.tagger``
  Very fast tagger trained on the training portion of
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] using the ``neopren`` feature
  set. It contains the ``czech-morfflex-161115-pos_only.dict`` morphological dictionary
  and reaches 99.01% tag
  accuracy, 97.69% lemma accuracy and 97.66% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] etest data (which morphological tags and lemmas
  were remapped using the ``czech-morfflex-161115-pos_only.dict`` dictionary).
  Model speed: ~250k words/s, model size: 5MB.


=== No Diacritical Marks Variant ===[czech-morfflex-pdt_no_dia_variant]

Sometimes the text to be analyzed does not contain diacritical marks.
We therefore provide variants of the morphological dictionary and tagger
for this purpose -- morphological analysis, morphological generation and
tagging employ forms without diacritical marks. Note that the lemmas do
have diacritical marks.

We provide the ``no_dia`` variants for all four models described above:

: ``czech-morfflex-161115-no_dia.dict``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``czech-morfflex-161115.dict``.

: ``czech-morfflex-pdt-161115-no_dia.tagger``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``czech-morfflex-161115.tagger``.
  It reaches 94.69% tag
  accuracy, 97.06% lemma accuracy and 93.84% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] etest data (which morphological tags and lemmas
  were remapped using the ``czech-morfflex-161115-no_dia.dict`` dictionary)
  with diacritical marks removed.
  Model speed: ~7.5k words/s, model size: 22MB.

: ``czech-morfflex-161115-no_dia-pos_only.dict``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``czech-morfflex-161115-pos_only.dict``.

: ``czech-morfflex-pdt-161115-no_dia-pos_only.tagger``
  No diacritical marks variant of ``czech-morfflex-161115-pos_only.tagger``.
  It reaches 98.55% tag
  accuracy, 97.07% lemma accuracy and 97.02% overall accuracy on
  [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] etest data (which morphological tags and lemmas
  were remapped using the ``czech-morfflex-161115-no_dia-pos_only.dict`` dictionary)
  with diacritical marks removed.
  Model speed: ~125k words/s, model size: 11MB.


=== Models with Raw Lemmas ===[czech-morfflex-pdt_raw_lemmas_variant]

The Czech morphological system distinguish different meanings of same lemmas by
numbering the lemmas with multiple meanings and supplying additional comments
for every lemma meaning, as described and demonstrated in
[Czech Morphological System #czech_morphological_system]. Sometimes this may be
undesirable, for example when comparing to systems which do not use the
[MorfFlex CZ http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1834] morphological dictionary.

To obtain lemmas without any additional information (//raw lemmas// in terms of
MorphoDiTa API), use ``strip_lemma_id`` tag set converter.  Previously,
specific dictionary and tagger model variants were provided, which is not needed
anymore.

=== Czech Model History ===[czech-morfflex-pdt_changes]

: ``czech-morfflex-161115`` and ``czech-morfflex-pdt-161115`` (require MorphoDiTa 1.9 or later)
  Trained on [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] using [MorfFlex CZ 161115 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1834]
  and [DeriNet 1.2 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/derinet],
  variants: Part of Speech Only, No Diacritical Marks. [Download from LINDAT/CLARIN repository http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1836].

: ``czech-morfflex-160310`` and ``czech-morfflex-pdt-160310`` (require MorphoDiTa 1.0 or later)
  Trained on [PDT 3.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0] using [MorfFlex CZ 160310 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1673],
  variants: Part of Speech Only, No Diacritical Marks. [Download from LINDAT/CLARIN repository http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1674].

: ``czech-morfflex-131112`` and ``czech-morfflex-pdt-131112`` (require MorphoDiTa 1.0 or later)
  Trained on [PDT 2.5 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5] using [MorfFlex CZ 131112 http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0015-A780-9],
  variants Part of Speech Only, Raw Lemmas. [Download from LINDAT/CLARIN repository http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-097C-0000-0023-68D8-1].


