Czech MorfFlex2+PDT-C Models
============================

== Czech MorfFlex2+PDT-C Models ==[czech-morfflex2-pdtc]

Czech models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/] licence.
The Czech morphology uses the
[MorfFlex CZ 2.1 https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-5833]
Czech morphological dictionary and the Czech tagger is trained on
[PDT-C 2.0 https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-5813]. The morpholodical derivator
is uses the [DeriNet 2.3 https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-5846].
The models work in MorphoDiTa version 1.9 or later.

Apart from MorfFlex CZ dictionary, a prefix guesser and statistical guesser
are implemented and can be optionally used when performing morphological analysis.


=== Download ===[czech-morfflex2-pdtc_download]

The latest version 250909 of the Czech MorfFlex2+PDT-C models can be downloaded
from [LINDAT/CLARIN repository https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-5985].


=== Acknowledgements ===[czech-morfflex2-pdtc_acknowledgements]

This work has been has been supported by the LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ project funded
by Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic (project
//LM2018101//).

==== Publications ====[czech-morfflex2-pdtc_publications]

- (Straková et al., 2014) Straková Jana, Straka Milan and Hajič Jan. //[Open-Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatization, POS Tagging and Named Entity Recognition https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5003.pdf].// In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 13-18, Baltimore, Maryland, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics.

- (Jonáš Vidra et al., 2019) Jonáš Vidra, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Magda Ševčíková, Lukáš Kyjánek. //Towards an All-in-One Word-Formation Resource.// In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Resources and Tools for Derivational Morphology (DeriMo 2019). Prague, 2019, pp. 81-89.

- (Jan Hajič et al., 2020) Jan Hajič, Eduard Bejček, Jaroslava Hlavacova, Marie Mikulová, Milan Straka, Jan Štěpánek, and Barbora Štěpánková. //[Prague Dependency Treebank - Consolidated 1.0 https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.641.pdf].// In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages 5208–5218, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association.

- (Marie Mikulová et al., 2022) Mikulová Marie, Hajič Jan, Hana Jiří, Hanová Hana, Hlaváčová Jaroslava, Jeřábek Emil, Štěpánková Barbora, Vidová Hladká Barbora, Zeman Daniel. //[Manual for Morphological Annotation, Revision for the Prague Dependency Treebank - Consolidated 2020 release https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/techrep/tr64.pdf].// Technical report no. TR-2020-64, Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University, Prague, Czechia, 2020.


=== MorfFlex CZ 2 Morphological System ===[czech_morfflex2_system]

The MorfFlex CZ 2 uses a so-called //PDT-C tag set//, which is an evolution
of the original //PDT tag set// devised by Jan Hajič
([Hajič 2004 https://books.google.cz/books?id=sB63AAAACAAJ]).
The tags are positional with 15 positions corresponding to part of speech,
detailed part of speech, gender, number, case, etc. (e.g. ``NNFS1-----A----``).
Different meanings of same lemmas are distinguished and additional comments can
be provided for every lemma meaning. The lemma itself without the comments and
meaning specification is called a //raw lemma//. The following examples
illustrate this:

- ``Japonsko_;G`` (raw lemma: ``Japonsko``)
- ``se_^(zvr._zájmeno/částice)`` (raw lemma: ``se``)
- ``tvořit_:T`` (raw lemma: ``tvořit``)


The complete reference can be found in the
[Manual for Morphological Annotation, Revision for the Prague Dependency Treebank - Consolidated 2020 release https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/techrep/tr64.pdf].


=== PDT-C 2.0 Train/Dev/Test Split ===[czech-morfflex2-pdtc_split]

The PDT-C 2.0 corpus contains four datasets, each with an official train/dev/test split.

Note that this is different to PDT-C 1.0, where some datasets do not have an
official split. The PDT-C 2.0 official splits are nearly identical to the ones
used in MorhoDiTa PDT-C 1.0 models, with the exception of PCEDT, which is
a translated version of the Wall Street Journal. Unfortunately, WSJ has several
splits; PDT-C 2.0 uses sections 02-21 as train, sections 00, 01, 22, 24 as dev,
and section 23 as test, while MorphoDiTa PDT-C 1.0 models use sections 0-18 as
train, sections 19-21 as dev, and sections 22-24 as test.

=== Model Variants ===[czech-morfflex2-pdtc_variants]

Apart from the primary model, which predicts all the 15 tag positions and processed
texts with diacritics, we also provide several variants:

- ``pos_only``: Instead of all 15 tag positions, the model predicts only the first 2,
  which contain the coarse and detailed POS, plus the full lemma, while being
  circa 15 times faster than the primary model.

- ``no_dia``, ``no_dia-pos_only``: The forms (during morphological analysis,
  generation, and tagging) have the diacritical marks stripped; however, the
  lemmas do include them. Useful for processing texts without diacritics.


=== Model Performance ===[czech-morfflex2-pdtc_performance]

||                                                      | Tags                                 ||||| Lemmas                               ||||| Performance         ||
|| Model                                                | PDT   | PCEDT | PDTSC | Faust | MacroAvg | PDT   | PCEDT | PDTSC | Faust | MacroAvg | Speed       | Size   |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.1-pdtc2.0-250909``                 | 95.95 | 97.24 | 97.63 | 95.08 | 96.47    | 98.29 | 98.98 | 98.83 | 97.69 | 98.45    | 26k toks/s  | 25.0MB |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.1-pdtc2.0-250909-pos_only``        | 98.61 | 99.30 | 99.10 | 98.24 | 98.81    | 98.10 | 98.79 | 98.69 | 97.31 | 98.22    | 328k toks/s | 10.1MB |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.1-pdtc2.0-250909-no_dia``          | 95.19 | 96.54 | 97.19 | 94.18 | 95.78    | 97.48 | 98.25 | 98.37 | 97.05 | 97.79    | 13k toks/s  | 31.7MB |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.1-pdtc2.0-250909-no_dia-pos_only`` | 98.18 | 98.96 | 98.75 | 97.95 | 98.46    | 97.21 | 98.06 | 98.13 | 96.54 | 97.48    | 186k toks/s | 14.9MB |

=== Czech Model History ===[czech-morfflex2-pdtc_changes]

==== czech-morfflex2.0-pdtc1.0-220710 ====

The ``czech-morfflex2.0-pdtc1.0-220710`` models use the
[MorfFlex CZ 2.0 https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-3186]
Czech morphological dictionary and the Czech tagger is trained on
[PDT-C 1.0 https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-3185]. The morpholodical derivator
is uses the [DeriNet 2.1 https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-3765].
The models work in MorphoDiTa version 1.9 or later and can be downloaded
from [LINDAT/CLARIN repository https://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-4794].

The PDT-C 1.0 corpus consists of four datasets, but some of them do not have an
official train/dev/test split. We therefore used the following split (which is
identical to PDT-C 2.0 official split, with the exception of PCEDT split):

- PDT dataset is already split into train, dev (``dtest``), and test (``etest``).
- PCEDT dataset is a translated version of the Wall Street Journal, so we used
  the usual split into train (sections 0-18), dev (sections 19-21), and test
  (sections 22-24).
- PDTSC and FAUST datasets have no split, so we split it into dev (documents
  with identifiers ending with 6), test (documents with identifiers ending with 7),
  and train (all the remaining documents).


The model performance using the PDT-C 1.0 train/dev/test split is the following:
||                                                      | Tags                                 ||||| Lemmas                               ||||| Performance           ||
|| Model                                                | PDT   | PCEDT | PDTSC | Faust | MacroAvg | PDT   | PCEDT | PDTSC | Faust | MacroAvg | Speed        | Size    |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.0-pdtc1.0-220710``                 | 96.29 | 97.00 | 96.90 | 94.87 | 96.27    | 98.69 | 98.85 | 98.18 | 97.53 | 98.31    |   19k toks/s |  24.4MB |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.0-pdtc1.0-220710-pos_only``        | 98.99 | 99.12 | 98.45 | 97.85 | 98.60    | 98.50 | 98.63 | 98.09 | 97.05 | 98.07    |  253k toks/s |   9.5MB |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.0-pdtc1.0-220710-no_dia``          | 95.57 | 96.13 | 96.40 | 93.46 | 95.39    | 97.88 | 98.20 | 97.67 | 96.57 | 97.58    |   11k toks/s |  30.4MB |
 | ``czech-morfflex2.0-pdtc1.0-220710-no_dia-pos_only`` | 98.55 | 98.73 | 98.07 | 97.31 | 98.17    | 97.60 | 97.85 | 97.52 | 95.98 | 97.24    |  177k toks/s |  14.5MB |
